---
layout: article
title: EM Waves
---

<h2>EM Waves</h2>
<hr>
The idea of talking to someone thousands of miles away via 'wireless communication' wouldn't have made any sense to a person living a few centuries before. But this has become so commonplace that we don't even tend to think about how it happens. To most of us, it is so intrinsic that the mere possibility of non-existence of this kind of communication system seems very troublesome. So I have decided to take some time to appreciate this engineering marvel and at the same time explain how it is possible.

An electromagnetic field is present everywhere around us and in the whole universe. This field is due to all the natural 'sources' of the electric and magnetic forces. The idea of a 'field' is a theoretical proposition but many people believe it actually has a physical existence. It took all the great physicists a very long time to understand the very nature of these fields (electric and magnetic) and formulate a mathematical theory which gives us a quantitative understanding of these fields. A very interesting property of these fields is that any 'disturbance' in it travels with a 'speed' that startlingly equals the speed of light thus establishing to a certain extent that light is in fact an electromagnetic wave.

Consider this very simple form of communication. Two persons, each with an electric torch light are located a certain distance apart (but not too far that the light from the torch of one person is not visible to the other). If one wishes to communicate with the other, he will do so by flashing the torch in a certain pattern which is familiar to both of them. The other person looking at this will understand the message from the flashing pattern of his peer's flash light. In this simple system, the flash light of one person is the transmitter and the pair of eyes of the other is the receiver. The 'signal' here is transmitted using light waves which are electromagnetic. Communication is also possible by just dimming the light instead of turning it off.

It was discovered that in the same way, the electromagnetic field can be used somehow to communicate messages. The EM field can be 'disturbed' in a certain way and this disturbance travels through various media and can be 'received' by the receiver. We humans are now so good at doing this (creating devices that can communicate using the EM field) that we use it pretty much everywhere in our day to day lives. The process of how this happens may be understood with the help of this simple analogy-

Suppose that there is a narrow river somewhere and two people are present on either sides of the river on the shores. Also suppose that these two are not as fortunate as the two persons in the previous example and so they don't have flash lights. But they wish to communicate with each other. Suppose that the river is wide enough that they cannot hear or see each other 'clearly'. Now I'd like to propose one way in which they can communicate. Imagine that the surface of the river is similar to the EM field and assume that the water is initially still. Now, one person taps gently on the water in order to generate ripples which are similar to the electromagnetic waves. These ripples take some limited amount of time to reach the other shore. The person transmitting the message can vary the frequency of his taps according to his code and the person on the other shore can understand to a certain extent the message.

Communication using EM waves is a little more complex than the water surface ripples system. Things like polarization and others come into play. Broadcast form of EM wave communication can be understood as follows. Consider once again the surface of still water. Now imagine moving your finger linearly back and forth gently on the surface of the water. Ripples are generated and will move away from the line of motion of your finger perpendicular to it. These ripples can be taken to be 'signals' and can be received  by anyone with some kind of a system which can convert the message in these ripples to a form that is easy to understand. Now the line along which our finger moves over the water is similar to an antenna. An antenna carries currents strong enough to disturb the EM field in the region and hence transmit signals using it.
